# Adding an Item

### Introduction

Adding a basic item is one of the first steps in modding. You're going
to need to create an `Item` object, register it, and give it a texture.
To add additional behavior to the item you will need a custom Item
class. In this tutorial and all future ones, the "tutorial" namespace is
used as a placeholder. If you have a separate modid, feel free to use it
instead.

### Registering an Item

First, create an instance of Item. We'll store it at the top of our
initializer class. The constructor takes in an `Item.Settings` (or a
`FabricItemSettings`) instance, which is used to set item properties
such as the inventory category, durability, and stack count.

```java
public class ExampleMod implements ModInitializer {

    // an instance of our new item
    public static final Item FABRIC_ITEM = new Item(new FabricItemSettings().group(ItemGroup.MISC));
    [...]
}
```

You'll use the vanilla registry system for registering new content. The
basic syntax is `Registry#register(Registry Type, Identifier, Content)`.
Registry types are stored as static fields in the `Registry` class, and
the identifier is what labels your content. Content is an instance of
whatever you're adding. This can be called anywhere as long as it occurs
during initialization.

```java
public class ExampleMod implements ModInitializer {

    // an instance of our new item
    public static final Item FABRIC_ITEM = new Item(new FabricItemSettings().group(ItemGroup.MISC));
      
    @Override
    public void onInitialize() {
        Registry.register(Registry.ITEM, new Identifier("tutorial", "fabric_item"), FABRIC_ITEM);
    } 
}
```

Your new item has now been added to Minecraft. Run the `runClient`
Gradle task to see it in action.

<img src="/tutorial/2019-02-17_16.50.44.png" width="400" />

### Adding Item textures

Registering a texture for an item requires an item model .json file and
a texture image. You're going to need to add these to your resource
directory. The direct path of each is:

    Item model: .../resources/assets/tutorial/models/item/fabric_item.json
    Item texture: .../resources/assets/tutorial/textures/item/fabric_item.png

Our example texture can be found
[here](https://i.imgur.com/CqLSMEQ.png).

If you registered your item properly in the first step, your game will
complain about a missing texture file in a fashion similar to this:

    [Server-Worker-1/WARN]: Unable to load model: 'tutorial:fabric_item#inventory' referenced from: tutorial:fabric_item#inventory: java.io.FileNotFoundException: tutorial:models/item/fabric_item.json

It conveniently tells you exactly where it expects your asset\[s\] to be
found-- when in doubt, check the log.

A basic item model template is:

```JavaScript
{
  "parent": "item/generated",
  "textures": {
    "layer0": "tutorial:item/fabric_item"
  }
}
```

The parent of your item changes how it's rendered in the hand and comes
in useful for things like block items in the inventory. "item/handheld"
is used for tools that are held from the bottom left of the texture.
textures/layer0 is the location of your image file.

Final textured result:

<img src="/tutorial/item_texture.png" width="400" />

### Creating an Item class

To add additional behavior to the item you will need to create an Item
class. The default constructor requires an Item.Settings object.

```java
public class FabricItem extends Item {

    public FabricItem(Settings settings) {
        super(settings);
    }
}
```

A practical use-case for a custom item class would be making the item
play a sound when you use it:

```java
public class FabricItem extends Item {

    public FabricItem(Settings settings) {
        super(settings);
    }
      
    @Override
    public TypedActionResult<ItemStack> use(World world, PlayerEntity playerEntity, Hand hand) {
        playerEntity.playSound(SoundEvents.BLOCK_WOOL_BREAK, 1.0F, 1.0F);
        return TypedActionResult.success(playerEntity.getStackInHand(hand));
    }
}
```

Replace the old Item object with an instance of your new item class:

```java
public class ExampleMod implements ModInitializer {

    // an instance of our new item
    public static final FabricItem FABRIC_ITEM = new FabricItem(new FabricItemSettings().group(ItemGroup.MISC));
    [...]
}
```

If you did everything correctly, using the item should now play a sound.

### What if I want to change the stack size of my item?

For this you would use `maxCount(int size)` inside `FabricItemSettings`
to specify the max stack size. Note that if your item is damageable you
cannot specify a maximum stack size or the game will throw a
RuntimeException.

```java
public class ExampleMod implements ModInitializer {

    // An instance of our new item, where the maximum stack size is 16
    public static final FabricItem FABRIC_ITEM = new FabricItem(new FabricItemSettings().group(ItemGroup.MISC).maxCount(16));
    [...]
}
```

### Next Steps

[Add your item to your own ItemGroup](../Modding-Tutorials/Items/itemgroup.md).
